=== PAGE 1 ===
5902
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 5, MAY 2024
Federated Multiagent Deep Reinforcement Learning
Approach via Physics-Informed Reward for
Multimicrogrid Energy Management
Yuanzheng Li
, Member, IEEE, Shangyang He, Yang Li
, Senior Member, IEEE,
Yang Shi
, Fellow, IEEE, and Zhigang Zeng
, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—The utilization of large-scale distributed renewable
energy (RE) promotes the development of the multimicrogrid
(MMG), which raises the need of developing an effective energy
management method to minimize economic costs and keep self
energy sufﬁciency. The multiagent deep reinforcement learning
(MADRL) has been widely used for the energy management
problem because of its real-time scheduling ability. However,
its training requires massive energy operation data of micro-
grids (MGs), while gathering these data from different MGs
would threaten their privacy and data security. Therefore, this
article tackles this practical yet challenging issue by proposing
a federated MADRL (F-MADRL) algorithm via the physics-
informed reward. In this algorithm, the federated learning (FL)
mechanism is introduced to train the F-MADRL algorithm,
thus ensures the privacy and the security of data. In addition,
a decentralized MMG model is built, and the energy of each
participated MG is managed by an agent, which aims to minimize
economic costs and keep self energy sufﬁciency according to the
physics-informed reward. At ﬁrst, MGs individually execute the
self-training based on local energy operation data to train their
local agent models. Then, these local models are periodically
uploaded to a server and their parameters are aggregated to
build a global agent, which will be broadcasted to MGs and
replace their local agents. In this way, the experience of each
MG agent can be shared and the energy operation data are not
explicitly transmitted, thus protecting the privacy and ensuring
data security. Finally, experiments are conducted on Oak Ridge
National Laboratory distributed energy control communication
Manuscript
received
16
August
2022;
revised
27
October
2022;
accepted 23 December 2022. Date of publication 3 January 2023; date of
current version 3 May 2024. This work was supported in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62233006 and 62073148,
in part by the Key Scientiﬁc and Technological Research Project of State
Grid Corporation of China under Grant 1400-202099523A-0-0-00, in part
by the Technology Innovation Project of Hubei Province of China under
Grant 2019AEA171, and in part by the 111 Project on Computational Intel-
ligence and Intelligent Control under Grant B18024. (Corresponding author:
Yang Li.)
Yuanzheng Li and Zhigang Zeng are with the Key Laboratory on Image
Information Processing and Intelligent Control of Ministry of Education,
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China, and also with the China-Belt
and Road Joint Laboratory on Measurement and Control Technology, Wuhan
430074, China (e-mail: Yuanzheng_Li@hust.edu.cn; zgzeng@hust.edu.cn).
Shangyang He is with the China-EU Institute for Clean and Renewable
Energy, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074,
China (e-mail: heshangyang10@hust.edu.cn).
Yang Li is with the School of Electrical Engineering, Northeast Electric
Power University, Jilin 132012, China (e-mail: liyang@neepu.edu.cn).
Yang Shi is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of
Victoria, Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada (e-mail: yshi@uvic.ca).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3232630
laboratory MG (ORNL-MG) test system, and the comparisons
are carried out to verify the effectiveness of introducing the FL
mechanism and the outperformance of our proposed F-MADRL.
Index Terms—Federated learning (FL), multiagent deep rein-
forcement learning (MADRL), multimicrogrid (MMG), proximal
policy optimization (PPO).
I. INTRODUCTION
I
N RECENT years, renewable energy (RE) has been widely
deployed, such as wind power and photovoltaic. Unlike
traditional power plants, RE resources are usually distributed.
Therefore, microgrids (MGs) have been paid much attention
to use the RE. Note that the MG usually works in a local area
and provides the required electricity for a small entity, such
as a school, a hospital, or a community [1], [2], [3], [4].
Normally, the main target of MG is to achieve the
self-sufﬁciency of energy via the utilization of RE. However,
due to its limited capacity, the MG has to take the risk of
power shortage. Speciﬁcally, since the user demand and RE
are dependent on the user behavior and weather condition,
the power demand may exceed the capacity of MG while
RE generation may be insufﬁcient, thus causing the power
shortage [5]. For this reason, numerous adjacent MGs are
interconnected to form a multi-MG (MMG) system. Compared
with an isolated MG, the MMG system is more capable of
using RE because of its larger capacity. Besides, although
these MGs belong to different entities, the energy is allowed
to be traded among different MGs, i.e., each MG can actively
sell its surplus power when its power generation exceeds
the demand, or purchase power from other MGs when the
generation is insufﬁcient [6]. Therefore, the MMG is more
promising to achieve energy self-sufﬁciency compared with
an isolated MG.
However, because of the complexity of energy management
of the MMG, it is essential to adopt an effective scheme. The
present studies of MMG energy management can be mainly
categorized into two types, i.e., the centralized and decen-
tralized schemes. The former one is based on a centralized
energy management center, which could get access to the
related energy information of all MGs in the MMG system [7],
[8]. Then, this center can well make decisions to achieve the
energy self-sufﬁciency of the MMG system. However, note
that the multiple MGs usually belong to different entities, and
2162-237X © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 06:46:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 2 ===
LI et al.: FEDERATED MADRL APPROACH VIA PHYSICS-INFORMED REWARD
5903
it is difﬁcult for the centralized management center to acquire
operation data of all MGs due to the increasing awareness of
privacy protection.
Therefore, a more popular research direction is the decen-
tralized MMG management scheme. For instance, Ng and
El-Shatshat [9] have proposed the concept of MMG con-
trol, which uses the multiagent approach to achieve the
decentralized control of each MG. In addition, Yang et al.
[10] have adopted multiple self-decision agents replacing the
energy management center for the energy self-sufﬁciency of
participated MGs. Liu et al. [11] have treated the MMG
system as a fully distributed optimization model, which is
solved by a robust optimal scheduling algorithm. Moreover,
Jiang et al. [12] has proposed a multiagent MMG system,
where the individual agent of each MG collects the data from
local units and performs optimization separately. In addition,
Bui et al. [13] have proposed the MG agents to well use
the partially observed information, for achieving the optimal
energy management of MMG.
The aforementioned literature focuses on building accurate
optimization models, which can be summarized as the model-
based approach. However, there exists an essential drawback,
i.e., the model-based approach is merely suited for the prede-
termined scheduling solution rather than a real-time decision.
In other words, the predetermined scheduling is difﬁcult to
handle emergencies or the unexpected change in the load
demand occurring in the MMG system.
To
tackle
this
problem, the
learning-based
approach
has been developed in recent years [14], [15]. Beneﬁting
from the development of the physics-informed deep learning
techniques, the outputs of the black-box model are more
generalized and interpretable [16]. One of the most represen-
tative approaches is multiagent deep reinforcement learning
(MADRL), which is widely deployed in the MMG energy
management problem due to its nature of interacting with
the physical characteristic of the real world [17], [18]. For
instance, the MADRL used in Nakabi and Toivanen [19]
observes the temperature, energy generation, and other physi-
cal parameters to control soft load and transaction effectively
for MMG. The experiments demonstrate the convergence of
these algorithms and emphasize the outperformance of the
actor-critic algorithm. Samadi et al. [20] propose an energy
management approach that takes advantage of a multiagent
model-free reinforcement learning algorithm. This distributed
and hierarchical decision mechanism effectively increases the
energy self-sufﬁciency of MMG. Besides, an MADRL method
is adopted in Nie et al. [21] to realize the post-disaster
resilience of the distributed MG system. Aiming to increase
the income of the system, the MADRL shows its strong adapt-
ability in different conditions through experiments. Moreover,
the implementation of MADRL would signiﬁcantly increase
the autonomy of each MG [22], [23]. For instance, an MADRL
framework based on the deep neural network is proposed in
Fang et al. [22] to improve the operational performance and
autonomy of each participant MG. Liu et al. [23] set the agents
in different MGs for the distributed control and achieve higher
MG autonomy. To balance the beneﬁts of the MMG partici-
pants and guarantee the efﬁciency, Fang et al. [24] propose
an equilibrium selection multiagent reinforcement learning
algorithm based on Q-learning to promote the autonomy of
MG operation.
However, since the MADRL technology requires massive
data to train the MG agent, the concern of user privacy is
raised. The data of the users can be used to analyze their
habits and even their life tracks. In the case of MMG energy
management, to train an effective agent with a high generaliza-
tion, massive energy operation data should be collected from
different MGs. However, although each MG aims to pursue a
better performance through experiences’ sharing, they may be
not willing to submit their processing data because of privacy
awareness [22]. On the other hand, the security during data
transmission cannot be guaranteed.
To tackle the above issues, we introduce an emerging
distributed learning approach, namely, federated learning (FL),
for training MADRL in the MMG energy management via
physics-informed reward [25]. In other words, we apply the
FL to protect user privacy and guarantee data security while
ensuring the generalization of each MG agent in the MMG
system. Speciﬁcally, each MG is controlled by an agent, which
deploys a recent deep reinforcement model, namely, proximal
policy optimization (PPO) [26]. Each agent ﬁrst executes
the self-training according to the local energy operation data
of each MG to maximize the physics-informed reward, i.e.,
the economic operation and self energy sufﬁciency. Then,
the agents upload their local model parameters, such as the
weights and biases of the model, to a server. After that, these
parameters are aggregated by the server to construct a global
model, which will be broadcasted to each MG and replace the
local model. In this way, agents share their experiences through
the FL mechanism, which thus enhances their generalization1
compared with the local training. Moreover, the FL mechanism
only requires model parameters, and the operation data of each
MG would stay locally. Therefore, the user privacy and data
security can be guaranteed.
The main contributions of this article are presented as
follows.
1) An MMG system model is developed for the deployment
of FL, where each MG contains conventional generators
(CGs), batteries (BAs), RE generators (REGs), load,
and the energy management center. Then, a server is
introduced to implement the FL mechanism which can
communicate with MGs and aggregate the parameters of
the MG agent, such as the weight and bias of the neural
network models. Since the server would not perform as
a center of MMG that guides the decisions of each MG,
MGs would endow a high autonomy and suffer from
less risk of privacy leakage.
2) A federated MADRL (F-MADRL) algorithm is pro-
posed for the energy management of the MMG system.
Each MG has an agent that collects the operation data for
self-training. Then, the agent parameters are uploaded to
1Since the MGs in the MMG belong to different kinds of entities, their local
operation data manifest the preference of local users. Thus, the agent trained
by local data would be confronted of performances’ decline when operating
in other MGs, and this phenomenon is termed as the generalization decrease
of the MG agent.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 06:46:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 3 ===
5904
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 5, MAY 2024
the server and aggregated to a global agent. Afterward,
the agent of each MG is replaced by the global one.
In this way, the privacy of each MG user can be
protected.
3) A physics-informed reward is developed by orienting
targets of the MG agent, i.e., the economic operation
and the self energy sufﬁciency. The MG agents trained
through the physics-informed reward would be endowed
with a better interpretation of action because of the
consideration of physical targets.
4) Case studies conducted on the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory distributed energy control communication
laboratory microgrid (ORNL-MG) test system [27]
demonstrate that our proposed F-MADRL algorithm is
effective under different demands and RE scenarios.
Moreover, we verify that F-MADRL outperforms other
state-of-the-art DRL algorithms under the distributed
MMG model.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Section II introduces the theoretical basis of reinforcement
learning. In Section III, a decentralized MMG model is built.
Section IV proposes the F-MADRL algorithm and provides
its overall structure and technical details. In Section V, com-
prehensive case studies are conducted. Finally, Section VI
concludes this article.
II. THEORETICAL BASIS OF REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Normally, the Markov decision process (MDP) is deﬁned by
a ﬁve-tuple ⟨S, A, P, R, γ ⟩, where S is the ﬁnite state space
that stands for all valid states and A represents the ﬁnite set
of actions. P = {p(st+1|st, at)} stands for the set of transition
probability from state st to st+1, and R = r(st, at), R ∈R;
S × A →R is termed as the reward function, which is
normally the metric to evaluate the action. γ ∈[0, 1] indicates
the discount factor, which represents the importance of the
present reward [18], [28].
To solve the MDP, a policy π should be developed to
provide the probability of executing action a when observ-
ing the state s, i.e., π(a|s) = P[At = a|St = s]. The
aim of π is to maximize the discounted cumulative reward
during the ﬁnite time T , which is termed as the return
function
Ut =
T

k=t
γ k−tr(sk, ak)
(1)
where r(sk, ak) is the reward function, which calculates the
reward value under state sk with action ak; γ
∈[0, 1]
is the discount factor, representing the importance of the
future reward [29]. Then, two kinds of value functions are
deﬁned based on Ut to help the policy make decisions.
The ﬁrst is the state value function Vπ(s) and the other is
the action value function Qπ(a, s), which are formulated as
follows:
Vπ(s) = Eπ[Ut|St = s]
=

a
π(a|s)

s′
Pa
ss′

r(s, a) + γ Vπ

s′
(2)
Qπ(a, s) = Eπ[Ut|St = s, At = a]
=

s′
Pa
ss′

r

s, s′|a

+ γ

a′
Qπ

a′, s′
 
(3)
where Vπ(s) stands for the expectation of future reward at the
state s, and Qπ(a, s) represents the future expected reward
when selecting an action a at state s. s′ and a′ stand for the
possible reaching state and action at the state s, respectively.
Pa
ss′ is the transition probability from s to s′ under a. In fact,
Vπ(s) and Qπ(a, s) are used to evaluate the quality of the
state s and the action–state pair (a, s), respectively. They are
updated according to the above two equations and help the
policy π decide whether reaching the state or executing the
action.
III. DECENTRALIZED MMG ENERGY
MANAGEMENT MODEL
The decentralized MMG system includes numerous MGs
that are connected to a distribution power network. Usually,
an energy management center is set in each MG, which
performs as an agent to conduct self-training and control the
dispatchable elements, such as CGs and BAs. In this section,
to describe the energy management model of the MMG system
more clearly, we ﬁrst introduce the isolated MG model with
the MDP format before developing the MMG model.
A. Isolated MG Energy Management Model
Fig. 1 illustrates the structure of the isolated MG model and
a real-world MG system case. Normally, as shown in Fig. 1(a),
an MG is constructed by ﬁve types of elements: renewable
power generators, BA, CG, conventional load (CL), and energy
management center. Note that BAs and CGs are dispatchable
since their outputs are controlled by the management center.
On the contrary, because of the high uncertainties of RE, the
outputs of REG cannot be controlled. In addition, the energy
management center is termed as the agent that controls these
dispatchable elements by observing the state of MG operation.
Following this structure, the ORNL-MG test system is selected
as the real-world case in this article, which is illustrated in
Fig. 1(b).
1) Conventional Generator: It can be seen from Fig. 1 that
the CG includes diesel engine generator and micro turbine,
which generate power through fossil fuels. The cost functions
of CGs can be represented as follows:
C(PCG,i) = aCG,i P2
CG,i + bCG,i PCG,i + cCG,i
(4)
Pmin
CG,i ≤PCG,i ≤Pmax
CG,i
(5)
where C(PCG,i) represents the generation cost of ith CG, and
PCG,i is its generation power. aCG,i, bCG,i, and cCG,i denote the
cost coefﬁcients of the ith CG. Pmin
CG,i and Pmax
CG,i are the lower
and upper bounds of the ith CG, respectively.
2) RE Generator: Fig. 1 presents two kinds of REGs,
namely, wind turbine and photovoltaic. The generation of REG
normally depends on the natural environment such as wind
speed, temperature, weather, and solar irradiance [15]. Since
the REGs do not consume any fossil fuels, their generation
costs are not considered in this article.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 06:46:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 4 ===
LI et al.: FEDERATED MADRL APPROACH VIA PHYSICS-INFORMED REWARD
5905
Fig. 1.
Structure of (a) isolated MG and (b) ORNL-MG [27].
3) Battery: As one of the most commonly used energy
storage devices, BA can store energy generated by CGs and
REGs and release it when needed. Thus, the BA has two
operation states, namely, charging and discharging, which are
represented by the transition of its state of charge and can be
formulated as follows:
SOCt+1 = (1 −δ)SOCt −
Pt
BA
ηchCBA
(6)
SOCt+1 = (1 −δ)SOCt −ηdchPt
BA
CBA
(7)
where SOCt and SOCt+1 denote the charging state of BA at
time t and t +1, respectively. PBA is the charging–discharging
power of BA. Here, we assume PBA > 0 when the BA is
discharging, and PBA < 0 when the BA is charging. The
ηch and ηdch are the charging and discharging efﬁciencies,
respectively. δ denotes the discharging rate, which is set as
0.2%. CBA represents the capacity of BA.
The operation of BA would bring about the costs due to the
amortized purchase and maintenance, which is formulated by
the following equation [30]:
CPBA, j
 = aBA, j
PBA, j + 3Pmax
BA, j(1 −SOC)
2
+ bBA, j

PBA, j + 3Pmax
BA, j(1 −SOC)

+ cBA, j
(8)
Pmax
BA, j < PBA, j < Pmax
BA, j
(9)
where C(PBA, j) represents the cost of the jth BA. aBA, j,
bBA, j, and cBA, j are cost coefﬁcients of the jth BA. Pmax
BA, j and
Pmin
BA, j are the upper and lower bounds of BA output power,
respectively.
4) Network Power Loss of MG: Practically, there exists the
power loss because of the operation of generators and the
transmission of energy in the MG. The power loss usually
corresponds to the active generation power and can be esti-
mated as follows [31]:
λCG = ∂Ploss
∂PCG
,
λREG = ∂Ploss
∂PREG
,
λBA = ∂Ploss
∂PBA
(10)
where λCG, λREG, and λBA represent the power loss coefﬁcients
of CG, REG, and BA, respectively. According to Mudumbai
et al. [31], λCG, λREG, and λBA are recommended to be set in
[0.01, 0.02]. Therefore, they are set as 0.02 in this article.
Then, the power loss Ploss can be given by the following
equation [31]:
Ploss =
nCG

i=1
λCGPCG,i +
nREG

j=1
λREGPREG, j +
nBA

k=1
λBAPBA,k
(11)
where nCG, nREG, and nBA are the numbers of CGs, REGs,
and BAs in the isolated MG, respectively.
B. Isolated MG Energy Management Model via MDP and
Physics-Informed Reward
Since the energy management center of the MG is an agent
which is trained by the DRL algorithm, the above isolated MG
model should be reformulated as the MDP model. In addition,
considering the physical feasibility of the agent, the deﬁnition
of reward is designed to integrate the physical-informed rules,
which are presented as follows.
1) State: In this article, we consider a 24-h scheduling of the
MG, and each hour is denoted by t ∈{1, 2, . . . , 24}. The state
of MG at time t includes the energy operation information,
which is deﬁned as follows:
st =  Pt−1
L
, Pt−1
REG,1, . . . , Pt−1
REG,nREG, SOCt−1, Et−1
λ
 
(12)
where st indicates the state of MG at time t; Pt−1
L
and
Pt−1
REG,i stand for the load demand and the ith REG at time
t −1, respectively. In addition, Et−1
λ
is the electricity price
in the transaction between the MG and the distribution power
network.
2) Action: The action at is generated by the agent, which
controls the power outputs of the CGs and BAs at each time t,
according to the state st. In this study, it is deﬁned as follows:
at =
 
Pt
CG,1, . . . , Pt
CG,nCG, Pt
BA,1, . . . , Pt
BA,nBA
 
.
(13)
In DRL, the agent is normally a neural network, which is
difﬁcult to produce consistent and feasible in the early training
stage. Therefore, the actions are enforced to fulﬁll the output
constraints provided in (5) and (9)
Pt
CG,i = clipPt
CG,i, Pmin
CG,i, Pmax
CG,i
,
i ∈[1, nCG]
(14)
Pt
BA, j = clip

Pt
BA, j, Pmin
BA, j, Pmax
BA, j

,
j ∈[1, nBA]
(15)
where clip(t, tmin, tmax) is the clip function, which returns tmax
if t > tmax, and tmin if t < tmin.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 06:46:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 5 ===
5906
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 5, MAY 2024
3) Reward: The design of the reward signiﬁcantly impacts
the performance of DRL
training. A speciﬁc
physical
task-oriented reward would endow interpretability to the strat-
egy of the agent [16]. However, in some classical rein-
forcement learning tasks, such as CartPole [32] and Atari
Games [33], the design of their rewards is independent of the
physical characteristic of the problem. For instance, in Cart-
Pole, the reward is set as 0 if the action is available. Such
intuitive design of reward may mislead the agent thus slowing
down the training process and decreasing the interpretability
of the agent strategy, and it is not suitable for MG energy
management. Normally, the MG agent is expected to operate
economically while ensuring self energy sufﬁciency. There-
fore, considering the physical characteristic of the MG, the
reward is designed as physics-informed to satisfy the two
explicit targets, i.e., the training of the agent and realizing
the requirements of operation cost and self energy sufﬁciency,
simultaneously. The reward function is deﬁned as follows:
rt = −wC
⎛
⎝
nCG

i=1
C

Pt
CG,i

+
nBA

j=1
C

Pt
BA, j

⎞
⎠
−wdeEl(t) × abs

Pt
de

(16)
where rt is the reward value at time t, and El(t) ≥0 indicates
the price of purchasing electricity from the distribution power
grid. wC ∈[0, 1] and wde ∈[0, 1] indicate the weights to limit
the order of magnitude of reward. abs(·) stands for the absolute
function. Pt
de evaluates the deviation between load demand and
real generation, which is formulated by the following equation:
Pt
de = Pt
L −
⎛
⎝
nCG

i=1
Pt
CG,i +
nREG

j=1
Pt
REG, j +
nBA

k=1
Pt
BA,k −Pt
loss
⎞
⎠.
(17)
In this study, the physics-informed reward is composed of
two physical targets of MG, i.e., operation costs and self
energy sufﬁciency. They are formulated as (nCG
i=1 C(Pt
CG,i) +
nBA
j=1 C(Pt
BA, j)) and El(t) × abs(Pt
de), respectively. To keep
the order of magnitude of the reward consistent, the self energy
sufﬁciency is designed as Pt
de times El(t). Since the reward
is related to the physical valuables, i.e., Pt
CG,i, Pt
BA, j, and
Pt
de, it can be endowed the physical meaning. In this way,
the reward is able to guide the agent to produce a series of
actions that minimize the generation costs of CGs and BAs
while ensuring self energy sufﬁciency.
C. Decentralized MMG Energy Management Model
As shown in Fig. 2, a decentralized MMG model that
contains n p MGs is considered in this article. These MGs
are connected to the distribution power network, and the
energy transaction between MGs is also allowed. Each MG
is controlled by an agent, which observes the state st of MG
and provides the action at.
Since the MG is encouraged to maximize the physics-
informed reward rt for achieving energy self-sufﬁciency and
economic operation, the target of the MMG should be the
maximum of the systematic rewards rsys,t, which can be
Fig. 2.
Structure of the MMG system.
represented by the sum of rewards obtained by all the MG
agents. The rsys,t is given by the following equation:
rsys,t =
n p

i=1
ri
t =
n p

i=1
− i × abs

Pt
i,de

(18)
where ri
t represents the reward obtained by the ith MG agent at
time t.  i and Pt
i,de are the shrinkage coefﬁcient and deviation
of MG i, respectively.
Besides, since the load demand of MG cannot be known
in advance, excessive or insufﬁcient power generation of an
isolated MG is unavoidable, and thus, the energy transaction
in the MMG system is inevitable. Therefore, the energy
transaction mechanism between different MGs is developed,
which is given below.
That is, MG is allowed to conduct energy transactions with
the distribution power network and other MGs, as shown in
Fig. 2. If the generated power of MG i exceeds its load demand
at time t, the excess energy will be sold to other MGs with
a price Ei(t). If the demand of MG i cannot be satisﬁed, the
MG will purchase electricity from MG j, which has the lowest
price of the whole participated MGs
j = arg min
l
El(t) × Ll,
l ∈

1, 2, . . . , n p

(19)
where Ll indicates whether the generation of MG l exceeds
its demand. Ll is set as 1 if the demand is exceeded or
set as inﬁnite if not. The MGs will preferentially purchase
the surplus power generated by other MGs. When the MG
generations are fully consumed, the distribution power network
will provide power with price Edpn(t), which is usually higher
than El(t),l ∈[1, 2, . . . , n p].
IV. F-MARDR ALGORITHM
As discussed above, the MMG is decentralized, and thus,
each MG agent has a high autonomy. However, the decen-
tralized structure threatens the generalization performance of
the agent, because the diversity of the data in isolated MG
is limited, which may make the agent getting trap into a
local optima. To tackle this issue, we propose a federated
F-MADRL algorithm. The FL is used to improve the gen-
eralization of the agent during training while ensuring data
privacy.
There are two characteristics in the FL, one is called the
participant and the other is termed as the collaborator. The
participant j, j ∈[1, n p] is denoted as a neural network
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 06:46:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 6 ===
LI et al.: FEDERATED MADRL APPROACH VIA PHYSICS-INFORMED REWARD
5907
model f j
w j . It conducts self-training at the local and uploads
its parameters w j to the collaborator periodically, where n p
is the number of participants which are processed in parallel.
Constrained by the data privacy, the participant f j
w j only trains
on the local dataset, which may cause insufﬁcient training
since the capacity and diversity of the data are limited. The FL
could tackle this problem through the following steps. First,
at the training epoch e, e ∈[1, Ne], the model of the jth
participant is deﬁned as f j
we
j, which conducts self-training to
obtain the parameters we
j, where Ne is the total number of
training epochs. Then, each participant uploads its parameters
to the collaborator and constructs a parameter list we =
[we
1, we
2, . . . , we
n p]. The collaborator calculates the weight
average of we to estimate a global model f e+1
G
with parameters
we+1
G . After aggregation, the collaborator broadcasts we+1
G
to all the participants and replaces their own parameters,
i.e., we+1
G
= we+1
1
= we+1
2
· · · = we+1
n p . The aggregating
mechanism of FL is formulated by the following equations:
we+1
j
= we
G −η∇Fj

we
j

∀j
(20)
we+1
G
=
n p

j=1
1
n p
we+1
j
(21)
where η and Fj(·) are the learning rate and local loss function
of the jth participant, respectively.
In this article, the participant can be considered as the agent
in each MG and the collaborator is a server that takes the
responsibility for aggregating and broadcasting the parame-
ters. The F-MADRL aims to solve the following distributed
optimization model:
min
we
G
F

we
G

=
n p

j=1
p j Fj

we
j

(22)
where F(·) is the global loss function. p j represents the
relative weight of each MG agent on the global model, and
p j > 0, n p
k=1 p j = 1. We set p j = |D j|/ n p
j=1 |D j|, where
|D j| is the data size used for the local training of the jth
MG. Note that F(·) cannot be directly computed without the
information sharing of each participant.
The overall structure of F-MADRL is illustrated in Fig. 3.
At the epoch e, the agent in three MGs are ﬁrst replaced by the
global agent in the (e−1)th epoch. Then, the three MG agents
conduce self-training to obtain parameters, which are uploaded
to the server for aggregation. Next, the global agent would be
built on the server, and the parameters will be broadcasted to
the MG agents for the (e + 1)th epoch.
It can be learned from the ﬁgure that the F-MADRL
contains two parts. One is executed on the server, which can
be considered as the collaborator, and the other is executed on
MG agents, which can be considered as the participant. The
procedures running on the server and MG agent are provided
in Sections IV-A and IV-B, respectively.
A. F-MADRL: Server Part
The F-MADRL proceed on the server mainly focuses on
the aggregating and broadcasting of the agent parameters, and
its procedure is shown in Algorithm 1.
Fig. 3.
Proposed F-MADRL algorithm.
Algorithm 1 F-MADRL Algorithm on the Server
1: Execute on the server:
2: Initialize the model parameters w0
G and broadcast them to
the MG agents.
3: for Global epoch e = 1 to Ne do
4:
for MG agent j = 1 to n p parallelly do
5:
Update the MG parameter we
j at the local agent.
6:
Store the we
j.
7:
Upload the we
j to the server
8:
end for
9:
Receive the parameters from each MG agent and con-
struct
10:
we ←[we
1, we
2, . . . , we
n p]
11:
Aggregating the model parameters through
12:
we+1
G
= n p
j=1
1
n p we+1
j
.
13:
Broadcast the we+1
G
to other MG agents.
14: end for
At the beginning of the training epoch of F-MADRL, the
server would build a global agent with the parameter w0
G,
which is then broadcasted to each MG agent for self-training.
Since the agents update their parameters in parallel, the
server aggregates the parameters’ list we = [we
1, we
2, . . . , we
n p]
by (21). Furthermore, the aggregated parameters we+1
G
are used
to update the global model parameters and broadcast to the
MG agents for the training of epoch e + 1.
B. F-MADRL: MG Agent
On the other hand, the MG agent adopts the self-training in
the procedure of F-MADRL and cooperates with the server.
When the MG agents receive the parameter we
G from the global
model at the epoch e, their parameters are replaced by we
G,
i.e., we
j = we
G. Then, each MG agent executes Ni individual
self-training epochs in parallel. Afterward, the parameters of
the MG agent at the last self-training epoch, namely, θNi , μNi ,
are stored and uploaded to the server.
In this article, each MG agent performs self-training with a
famous deep reinforcement learning algorithm, namely, PPO,
to obtain the optimal policy π. There are two types of deep
neural networks, namely, actor and critic, deﬁned by the
MG agent. Actor πθ is parameterized by θ, which aims to
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 06:46:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 7 ===
5908
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 5, MAY 2024
Fig. 4.
Procedure of the self-training of the MG agent.
produce the action, and the critic is denoted as V μ, which is
parameterized by μ.
The overall training process of the self-training proce-
dure during one episode is illustrated in Fig. 4. First, the
experiment tuples T
are sampled T
=
{⟨s0, a0,r0, s1⟩,
⟨s1, a1,r1, s2⟩, . . . , ⟨sU, aU,rU, sU+1⟩} where U indicates the
length of T. Then, the loss function of the actor at the kth
episodes is calculated, which is deﬁned as follows:
LC = Es,a∼T

min

πθ
k (a | s)
πθ
k−1(a | s) A
πθ
k
s,a,
clip

πθ
k (a | s)
πθ
k−1(a | s), 1 − , 1 +  

A
πθ
k
s,a
 
(23)
where Es,a∼T [·] represents the empirical average over the
sampled experiment tuples T . πk−1 and πk stand for the
previous and new policy, respectively.  is the clip parameter.
Aπk
s,a stands for the advantage, which measures if the action is
worth taking by comparing the action value and state value
Aπk
st,at = Eτ[U|s0 = st, a0 = at] −V (st) = Q(st, at) −V (st).
(24)
However, Aπk
s,a cannot be directly obtained since Q(st, at)
is difﬁcult to be determined. In this way, the generalized
advantage estimation method is implemented in this study
A
πθ
k
s,a = δV
0 + (γ λ)δV
1 + (γ λ)2δV
2 , . . . , +(γ λ)U−t+1δV
U−1 (25)
where γ ∈[0, 1] and λ ∈[0, 1] represent the discount factor
and a hyperparameter that adjust the tradeoff between bias and
variance of the estimation, respectively. Note that the variance
would be increased when raising λ while the bias is decreased
accordingly. According to the recommendation of Schulman
et al. [26], λ is set as 0.95. δV
k is calculated by the following
equation:
δV
k = rk + γ V μ
k (st+1) −V μ
k (st)
(26)
where V μ
k (st+1) and V μ
k (st) are given by the critic, which is
trained by the loss function LV
LV = Es,a∼T

γ V μ
k (st+1) + r(st, at) −V μ
k (st)
2
.
(27)
With the above equations, the parameters θ and μ of the
actor and the critic can be updated by the following equations:
θk+1 = θk + ηπ∇θkLC
(28)
μk+1 = μk + ηV ∇μkLV
(29)
where ηπ and ηV are the learning rates of the actor and critic,
respectively. Since both LC and LV are optimized in each MG
agent of the proposed F-MADRL algorithm, they are the local
loss functions which construct the global loss following (22).
Overall, the F-MADRL algorithm applied on the server can
be summarized in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 F-MADRL Algorithm on the MG Agent
1: Execute on each MG agent:
2: Parallel running on j, j ∈[1, n p] agent at global epoch e
3: Receive the parameters from the server we
j ←we
G
4: for Individual training epoch i = 1 to Ni do
5:
Collect the experience tuple T
=
{⟨s0, a0,r0, s1⟩,
⟨s1, a1,r1, s2⟩, . . . , ⟨sU, aU,rU, sU+1⟩}
6:
Compute the discounted factor:
7:
δV
k ←rk + γ V μ
k (st+1) −V μ
k (st)
8:
Estimate the advantage:
9:
A
πθ
k
s,a ←δV
0 + (γ λ)δV
1 + (γ λ)2δV
2 , . . . , +(γ λ)U−t+1δV
U−1
10:
Calculate the loss function of the actor:
11:
LC ←Es,a∼T [min( πθ
i (a|s)
πθ
i−1(a|s) A
πθ
i
s,a, clip( πθ
i (a|s)
πθ
i−1(a|s), 1−
12:
 , 1 +  )A
πθ
i
s,a)]
13:
Update the actor parameter:
14:
θi+1 ←θi + ηπ∇s,a∼T LC
15:
Calculate the loss function of the critic:
16:
LV ←Es,a∼T [(γ V μ
i (st+1) + r(st, at) −V μ
i (st))2]
17:
Update the critic parameter:
18:
μi+1 ←μi + ηV ∇μi LV
19: end for
20: Store the network parameters. we
j ←{θNi, μNi }
21: Upload the parameters we
j to the server.
C. Theoretical Convergence Analysis of the F-MADRL
In this section, the convergence of F-MADRL is evaluated.
At ﬁrst, the following assumptions considering the function
Fk, k ∈[1, n p] are made, by referring to Wang et al. [34].
Assumption 1: Fk is L-smooth, ∀w, w′,   Fk(w)− Fk(w′)
 2 ≤L w −w′ ; Fk(w) ≤Fk(w′) + ∇Fk(w′)T (w −w′) +
(L/2) w′ −w 2
2.
Assumption
2:
Fk
is
μ-strongly
convex,
∀w,
w′,
Fk(w) −(μ/2) Fk 2 is convex;
Fk(w)
≥
Fk(w′) +
∇Fk(w′)T (w −w′) + (μ/2) w′ −w 2
2.
Based on the above Assumptions, we have the following
Lemmas.
Lemma 1: F is μ-strongly convex and L-smooth.
Proof: Straightforwardly from Assumptions 1 and 2,
in line with the deﬁnition of convex, F is the ﬁnite sum of
Fk, and thus, it is μ-strongly convex and L-smooth as well.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 06:46:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 8 ===
LI et al.: FEDERATED MADRL APPROACH VIA PHYSICS-INFORMED REWARD
5909
Lemma 2: ∀w, w′ ∈Rn and wt = w + t(w −w′) for t ∈
[0, 1]. Then
F(w) −F

w′
=
 1
0
∇F(wt)T 
w′ −w

dt
(30)
and
F(w) −Fw′ −∇F(w)T w′ −w
=
 1
0
(∇F(wt) −∇F(w))T w′ −wdt.
(31)
Proof: (30) follows the fundamental theorem of calculus.
(31) follows from (30) by subtracting ∇F(w)T (w′ −w) from
both sides of the equation.
Lemma 3: If F is smooth and μ-strongly convex for μ > 0,
then for w∗= arg minw F(w)
1
2μ ∇F(w) 2
2 ≥F(w) −w∗≥μ
2  w −w∗ 2
2.
(32)
Proof: Applying Lemma 2, we have
F(w) ≥F(w∗) + ∇F(w∗)T (w −w∗) + μ
2  w∗−w 2
2.
(33)
Using the fact that ∇F(w∗) = 0, we yield
F(w) −F(w∗) ≥μ
2  w∗−w 2
2
(34)
which is the right side of (33).
Note that
F(w∗) ≥min
y
F(y) + ∇F(w)T (y −w) + μ
2  w −y 2
2
(35)
since y = w−(1/μ) ∇ F(w) minimizes the right side of the
above inequality, we yield
min
y

F(y) + ∇F(w)T (y −w) + μ
2  w −y 2
2

≥F(w) −1
2μ ∇F(w) 2
2
(36)
namely
1
2μ ∇F(w) 2
2 ≥F(w) −F(w∗).
(37)
Theorem 1: Considering F is L-smooth and μ-strongly
convex, let w∗= arg minw F(w), and w is the parameter at
the kth iteration. Then
F(wk) −F(w∗) ≤

1 −μ
L
k
(F(w0) −F(w∗)).
(38)
Consequently, it requires (L/μ) log(F(w0) −F(w∗) ) itera-
tions to ﬁnd  -optimal solution.
Proof: Applying Lemma 2, we have
|F(w) −F

w′
−∇F(w)T 
w′ −w

|
≤|
 1
0
(∇F(wt) −∇F(w))T 
w′ −w

dt|
≤
 1
0
(∇ F(wt) −∇F(w) ) w′ −w dt.
(39)
Based on Assumption 1,  F(wt) −∇F(w)) ≤t w −w′ .
Note that wt −w = t(w −w′). Then, we have
|F(w) −F

w′
−∇F(w)T 
w′ −w

|
≤
 1
0
(∇ F(wt) −∇F(w) ) w′ −w dt
≤L
2  w −w′ 2
2.
(40)
Note that
wk+1 = wk −η∇F(wk)
(41)
where η > 0 represents the learning rate. Then, we yield
F(wk+1) −

F(wk) + η ∇F(wk) 2
2

≤η2L
2  ∇F(wk) 2
2
(42)
if we pick η
=
(1/L), then
F(wk+1)
≤
F(wk) −
(1/2L) ∇F(wk) 2
2.
From
Lemma
3,
 ∇F(w) 2
2
≥
2μ(F(w) −F(w∗)). When putting them together
F(wk+1) −F(w∗) ≤F(wk) −F(w∗) −1
2L  ∇F(wk) 2
2
≤F(wk) −F(w∗)
−μ
L (F(wk) −F(w∗))
=

1 −μ
L

(F(wk) −F(w∗)).
(43)
Repeatedly applying this bound yields
F(wk) −F(w∗) ≤

1 −μ
L
k
(F(w0) −F(w∗)).
(44)
Using the fact that 1 + x ≤ex, the convergence rate is
given by picking k ≥(L/μ) log(F(w0) −F(w∗) ), where
 = F(wk) −F(w∗), denoting the error between the loss at
epoch k and the optimal one.
V. CASE STUDY
A. Experiment Setup
In this section, we conduct case studies based on the modi-
ﬁed ORNL-MG test system to demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed F-MADRL algorithm. Without loss of generality,
three MGs are applied to form the MMG system, and the
parameters of elements in each MG are provided in Table I.
A wind turbine and a PV panel are set as the REGs and
the corresponding power data are referred from Logenthiran
et al. [35]. The forecast errors of wind and PV power are
assumed to be independent of the Gaussian distribution with a
15% standard variation [35]. In addition, the time horizon of
the experiment is set as 24-h schedule, and the time interval
is set to be 1 h. The forecast total load demands and the
day-ahead market price of each MG are provided in Table II,
and the forecast error of the load is assumed to follow the
Gaussian distribution with a 3% standard variation [36], [37].
It can be learned from the load data that the power demands
of MG1 surpass its maximum capacity, which means MG1
operates in the energy self-insufﬁcient state. On the contrary,
MG2 and MG3 operate in the energy self-sufﬁcient state.
As for F-MADRL, the training epoch is set as 1500.
Moreover, γ and λ are set as 0.99 and 0.95, respectively [29].
A famous neural network optimizer, Adam [26], is used to
update F-MADRL, and the learning rate of actor ηπ and critic
ηV is set as 0.0001 and 0.001, respectively. Note that all
the simulation studies are conducted using Python 3.6.8 with
PyTorch 1.7.1.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 06:46:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 9 ===
5910
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 5, MAY 2024
TABLE I
PARAMETERS’ SETTING OF EACH MG
Fig. 5.
Reward curve of (a) MG1 agent, (b) MG2 agent, and (c) MG3 agent
during training.
B. Analysis of the F-MADRL Algorithm
In this section, the proposed F-MADRL is applied to the
MMG system and its performance evaluation is reported.
Fig. 5 presents the reward curve of the three MG agents,
respectively. During the whole training epochs, the FL mech-
anism is applied every 500 epochs and the training process
can be separated into three phases. Since the FL mechanism
averages the parameters of the MG agents, the reward value
of each agent would dramatically change in the two adjacent
phases and all three MG agents receive beneﬁts from this.
For instance, depending on the parameter setting of each
MG, the MG1 agent would not converge in the ﬁrst phase.
However, after applying the FL mechanism, its reward raises
at the 500th epoch and converges at −15059.85 at the end of
phase 2. Besides, although MG2 agent converges in phase 1,
the FL mechanism substantially renews its parameters and
further raises the reward to −3524.99 in the second phase.
As for MG3 agent, the beneﬁt of the FL mechanism is mainly
shown in the third phase, which helps the agent escape from
the local optimal converged at phase 2 and ﬁnally achieve
a higher reward at the end of training. In summary, the FL
mechanism can be used to get rid of the local optimum,
which is caused by insufﬁcient training data due to privacy
constraints.
Then, the policies obtained by F-MADRL are applied to
determine the scheduling of each MG. Speciﬁcally, Figs. 6−8
denote the scheduling of MG1, MG2, and MG3, respectively.
Each ﬁgure includes two kinds of graphs, where the above
graph is the scheduling solution and the lower graph shows
the unbalanced demands, namely, the difference between gen-
Fig. 6.
Scheduling of MG1 obtained by the F-MADRL algorithm.
Fig. 7.
Scheduling of MG2 obtained by the F-MADRL algorithm.
eration and load demands of the MG. The positive unbalanced
demands indicate the generation of the MG surpasses its load
demands, which means the demands are satisﬁed while the
negative one means the demands are unsatisﬁed.
As shown in Fig. 6, since the demands of MG1 are higher
than its capacity, MG1 operates in the energy self-insufﬁcient
state. Therefore, the demands of MG1 are all unsatisﬁed during
24 h. Moreover, the scheduling of BA generation obtained
by the agent mainly considers the power balance between
its charging and discharging. In the ﬁrst hour, the power
demand of MG1 is 457.7 kW, which is higher than the
capacity of MG1, and thus, the agent chooses to discharge
the battery for demand supply. Since MG1 operates in the
energy self-insufﬁcient state, it requires external power from
other MGs and distribution power system, which is achieved
by the transaction mechanism in the MMG system. Even the
unbalanced demands of MG1 are as high as −402 kW at
20:00, these power shortages can be supplied by other MGs
and the distribution power network. This is the reason why
MG1 agent does not fully operate its CG and BA all the time.
The agent learns that the energy transaction is more economic
than generating power by itself.
The scheduling policies of MG2 agent and MG3 agent
are similar but different from that of MG1. As illustrated
in Figs. 7 and 8, since MG2 and MG3 work in an energy
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 06:46:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 10 ===
LI et al.: FEDERATED MADRL APPROACH VIA PHYSICS-INFORMED REWARD
5911
TABLE II
FORECASTING WIND AND PV POWER, TRADING PRICE, AND LOADS OF THE THREE MGS
Fig. 8.
Scheduling of MG3 obtained by the F-MADRL algorithm.
self-sufﬁcient state, their power generations of CG could
almost satisfy their demand. In this way, to shrink the gen-
eration costs, the two agents perform a similar strategy in
the operation of BA. In the most time of 24 h, the power
outputs of BA are almost 0. Alternatively, the power of CGs
would change with the demands of MGs. For example, in the
15th and 16th hours, the generation and demand of MG2 are
nearly equal, thus only causing minor unbalanced demands in
these 2 h. Besides, the absolute values of unbalanced demands
during MG2 and MG3 operation are lower than 50 kW.
Those unbalanced demands can be eliminated according to the
transaction mechanism in the MMG. In this way, the excess
powers are sold to other MGs that work in a self-insufﬁcient
state and the power shortages can be supplied by the power
from other MGs or the distribution power network.
The above experiments show the efﬁciency of introducing
an FL mechanism in the proposed F-MADRL algorithm. The
MG agents trained by F-MADRL make efﬁcient scheduling
solutions regardless of whether the MG operates in the energy
self-sufﬁcient or self-insufﬁcient state.
C. Interpretation of the Agents’ Performance
It should be noted that the physics-informed reward would
bring about the interpretation of the strategy of agents, to some
Fig. 9.
Changes in the (a) unbalanced demands, (b) costs of CG, and
(c) cost of BA according to the training iterations.
degree. The three aspects of the reward function, i.e., the
costs of CG and BA and the balanced demand, are illustrated
along with iterations to study their changes. In this section,
six iterations located at a different phase of the training are
selected, namely, the 1st, 50th, 500th, 700th, 900th, and 1400th
iterations. Wherein the 1st and 50th iterations would present
the training performance in the early stages, the 500th iteration
is located at the end of the ﬁrst federated phase and the other
three iterations are set at the convergent state of the reward
value. Note that the values of the reward increase along with
the increase in the six iterations.
Fig. 9 illustrates the changes in the unbalanced demands,
costs of CG, and cost of BA in Fig. 9(a)–(c), respectively.
As shown in Fig. 9(a), the unbalanced demand of MG1
decreases from about 5500 to 3000 kW at the 1400th iter-
ation. Besides, the ﬁgures for MG2 and MG3 also present
a downward trend, and they start at 3000 and 1000 kW at
the 1st iteration and descend to lower than 500 kW after
1400 iterations. This means the agents could learn strategies
for energy self-sufﬁciency as much as possible. Besides,
Fig. 9(b) and (c) presents the different strategies of MG agents
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 06:46:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 11 ===
5912
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 5, MAY 2024
TABLE III
TEST REWARDS OF THE MG AGENTS
when operating in the energy self-sufﬁcient and energy self-
insufﬁcient state. As illustrated in Fig. 9(b), the CG costs
of MG2 and MG3 decrease, whereas MG1 raises. A similar
situation can also be observed in Fig. 9(c), and the costs of BA
for MG1 increase from around $6000–$25000. The BA costs
for MG2 and MG3 continuously decrease from about $10000
and dramatically increase at the 900th and 1400th iterations.
Overall, the MG agents trained by our proposed F-MADRL
algorithm could satisfy the target of the MMG system, namely,
the energy self-sufﬁcient with the designed physics-informed
reward. The algorithm has endowed the explainability by
analyzing the performance of the MG agents from the angle
of the physics-informed reward.
D. Performance Comparison
In this section, the effectiveness of introducing the FL
mechanism is demonstrated by comparing the performance of
the proposed F-MADRL with other algorithms that merely
implement the self-training of MG agents. These algorithms
include numerous well-known deep reinforcement learning
algorithms, namely, PPO, A2C, and TRPO. Since they are
conducted on multiple MG agents, these comparative algo-
rithms are termed PPO-MADRL, A2C-MADRL, and TRPO-
MADRL, respectively.
The comparisons are conducted from two aspects, i.e.,
convergence and generalization. First, the convergences of the
MG agents are illustrated by their reward curves. Besides,
to compare the generalization of the MG agents, the testing
rewards are set as the metric, which are obtained by testing the
agents in both the energy self-sufﬁcient and self-insufﬁcient
states. The MG agents are easy to get trapped in local optima
since they are trained by the local operation data, which merely
contain the preference of the local user. Consequently, the
testing reward is applied to well verify the generalization
of F-MADRL. Note that the physics-informed reward is a
sufﬁcient index for performance comparison, since the eco-
nomic cost and power balance are measured in the reward,
simultaneously.
Fig. 10 shows comparison of the convergence of each
algorithm, and the subplots (a), (b), and (c) represent the
training process of MG1 agent, MG2 agent, and MG3 agent,
respectively. As shown in this ﬁgure, A2C-MADRL performs
the worst, under the same learning rate and training epoch, and
the agents trained by A2C-MADRL cannot be well-converged.
In addition, although PPO-MADRL and TRPO-MADRL are
able to train the converge agents, their rewards are lower than
that of F-MADRL because of the lack of the mechanism of
sharing information.
Fig. 10.
Training reward of each MG agent.
In addition to the reward curves, the generalization of
F-MADRL is veriﬁed in Table III, which presents the test
rewards of each MG agent in the energy self-sufﬁcient and
self-insufﬁcient state. In this ﬁgure, the value of the best test
reward under each algorithm is bold. It can be learned that the
test rewards obtained by F-MADRL are −29017, −9529, and
−2935 for the three MG agents under an energy self-sufﬁcient
state, which surpasses other comparative algorithms. Besides,
the test rewards of three MG agents trained by F-MADRL
are −28650, −10276, and −3172, which perform the best in
the energy self-insufﬁcient state along with the comparative
algorithms as well. In addition, since the performance of the
F-MADRL is better than those of comparative algorithms
in both the energy self-sufﬁcient and self-insufﬁcient states,
it can be concluded that F-MADRL has a better generalization
performance.
The comparisons clarify that the introduction of the FL
mechanism leads to performance diversity between the pro-
posed F-MADRL and the other three algorithms. Since the
MG agents trained by PPO-MADRL, A2C-MADRL, and
TRPO-MADRL are only based on the local operation data
of MG due to the limitation of privacy and thus caus-
ing lower diversity of the training data. Consequently, the
decision-making ability of MG agents would decline. The
introduction of the FL mechanism alleviates this drawback.
Using FL, the experiences of MG agents can be shared without
threatening user privacy and data security. In this way, the
generalization ability of the agent would be improved, as ver-
iﬁed in the above experiments. Therefore, the comparisons
conducted in this section demonstrate the effectiveness of
introducing the FL mechanism in the MADRL algorithm and
also reveal a better generalization of F-MADRL.
VI. CONCLUSION
This article proposes an F-MADRL algorithm for the
MMGs’ system energy management. A decentralized MMG
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 06:46:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 12 ===
LI et al.: FEDERATED MADRL APPROACH VIA PHYSICS-INFORMED REWARD
5913
model is built ﬁrst, which includes numerous isolated MGs
and an agent is used to control the dispatchable elements
of each MG to achieve the physics-informed reward. Due
to privacy protection and data security, the F-MADRL is
implemented to train the agents. First, each agent adopts self-
training. Then, the FL mechanism is introduced to build a
global agent that aggregates the parameters of all the local
agents on the server and replaces the local MG agent with the
global one. Therefore, the experiences of each agent can be
shared without threatening the privacy and data security.
The case studies are conducted on an MMG with three
isolated MGs. The convergence and the performance of
F-MADRL are illustrated ﬁrst. Then, explanations of the
strategy of the three MG agents are presented by decomposing
the physics-informed reward under different iterations. After-
ward, by comparing with PPO-MADRL, A2C-MADRL, and
TRPO-MADRL, the F-MADRL achieves higher test rewards,
which means a better generalization. Therefore, it indicates the
performance enhancement of introducing the FL mechanism
in the MADRL and also demonstrates the effectiveness of our
proposed F-MADRL. In this article, the uncertainty of RE is
not considered because its complexity will cause difﬁculties in
the training of F-MADRL and reduce the accuracy of the MG
agent strategy. This issue is worth investigating in our future
work.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Liu, Q. Sun, R. Wang, and X. Hu, “Nonzero-sum game-based voltage
recovery consensus optimal control for nonlinear microgrids system,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Mar. 11, 2022,
doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3151650.
[2] Q. Sun, Y. Li, D. Ma, Y. Zhang, and D. Qin, “Model predictive direct
power control of three-port solid-state transformer for hybrid AC/DC
zonal microgrid applications,” IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 37, no. 1,
pp. 528–538, Feb. 2022.
[3] H. Zhang, D. Yue, C. Dou, X. Xie, K. Li, and G. P. Hancke,
“Resilient optimal defensive strategy of TSK fuzzy-model-based micro-
grids’ system via a novel reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Aug. 31, 2021, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3105668.
[4] Y. Li et al., “Optimal operation of multimicrogrids via cooperative
energy and reserve scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 14,
no. 8, pp. 3459–3468, Aug. 2018.
[5] W. Liu, W. Gu, J. Wang, W. Yu, and X. Xi, “Game theoretic non-
cooperative distributed coordination control for multi-microgrids,” IEEE
Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 6986–6997, Nov. 2018.
[6] H. Farzin, R. Ghorani, M. Fotuhi-Firuzabad, and M. Moeini-Aghtaie,
“A market mechanism to quantify emergency energy transactions value
in a multi-microgrid system,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 10,
no. 1, pp. 426–437, Jan. 2019.
[7] S. A. Areﬁfar, M. Ordonez, and Y. A.-R. I. Mohamed, “Energy manage-
ment in multi-microgrid systems-development and assessment,” IEEE
Trans. Power Syst., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 910–922, Mar. 2017.
[8] Y. Z. Li, P. Wang, H. B. Gooi, J. Ye, and L. Wu, “Multi-objective optimal
dispatch of microgrid under uncertainties via interval optimization,”
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 2046–2058, Mar. 2019.
[9] E. J. Ng and R. A. El-Shatshat, “Multi-microgrid control systems,” in
Proc. IEEE PES Gen. Meeting, Jul. 2010, pp. 1–6.
[10] X. Yang, H. He, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, and G. Weng, “Interactive energy
management for enhancing power balances in multi-microgrids,” IEEE
Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 6055–6069, Nov. 2019.
[11] Y. Liu et al., “Distributed robust energy management of a multimicrogrid
system in the real-time energy market,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 396–406, Jan. 2019.
[12] W. Jiang, K. Yang, J. Yang, R. Mao, N. Xue, and Z. Zhuo, “A multiagent-
based hierarchical energy management strategy for maximization of
renewable energy consumption in interconnected multi-microgrids,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 169931–169945, 2019.
[13] V. Bui, A. Hussain, and H.-M. Kim, “A multiagent-based hierarchical
energy management strategy for multi-microgrids considering adjustable
power and demand response,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 2,
pp. 1323–1333, Mar. 2018.
[14] Y. Li et al., “Dense skip attention based deep learning for day-ahead
electricity price forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., early access,
Oct. 27, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2022.3217579.
[15] Z. Li, Y. Li, Y. Liu, P. Wang, R. Lu, and H. B. Gooi, “Deep learning
based densely connected network for load forecasting,” IEEE Trans.
Power Syst., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 2829–2840, Jul. 2021.
[16] B. Huang and J. Wang, “Applications of physics-informed neural net-
works in power systems—A review,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 38,
no. 1, pp. 572–588, Jan. 2023.
[17] Y. Du and F. Li, “Intelligent multi-microgrid energy management based
on deep neural network and model-free reinforcement learning,” IEEE
Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1066–1076, Mar. 2020.
[18] L. Yu, S. Qin, M. Zhang, C. Shen, T. Jiang, and X. Guan, “A review
of deep reinforcement learning for smart building energy management,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 15, pp. 12046–12063, Aug. 2021.
[19] T. A. Nakabi and P. Toivanen, “Deep reinforcement learning for energy
management in a microgrid with ﬂexible demand,” Sustain. Energy,
Grids Netw., vol. 25, Mar. 2021, Art. no. 100413.
[20] E. Samadi, A. Badri, and R. Ebrahimpour, “Decentralized multi-agent
based energy management of microgrid using reinforcement learning,”
Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst., vol. 122, Nov. 2020, Art. no. 106211.
[21] H. Nie, Y. Chen, Y. Xia, S. Huang, and B. Liu, “Optimizing the post-
disaster control of islanded microgrid: A multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning approach,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 153455–153469, 2020.
[22] X. Fang, Q. Zhao, J. Wang, Y. Han, and Y. Li, “Multi-agent deep
reinforcement learning for distributed energy management and strat-
egy optimization of microgrid market,” Sustain. Cities Soc., vol. 74,
Nov. 2021, Art. no. 103163.
[23] W. Liu, Z. Wen, Y. Shen, and Z. Zhang, “Reinforcement learning-
based distributed secondary optimal control for multi-microgrids,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Energy Internet Energy Syst. Integr. (EI2), Nov. 2017,
pp. 1–4.
[24] X. Fang, J. Wang, G. Song, Y. Han, Q. Zhao, and Z. Cao, “Multi-
agent reinforcement learning approach for residential microgrid energy
scheduling,” Energies, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 123, Dec. 2019.
[25] S.
Lee
and
D.-H.
Choi,
“Federated
reinforcement
learning
for
energy management of multiple smart Homes with distributed energy
resources,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 488–497,
Jan. 2022.
[26] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” 2017, arXiv:1707.06347.
[27] Distributed Energy Communications & Controls Laboratory Activities.
Accessed:
Mar. 28, 2022. [Online].
Available:
https://energy.gov/
sites/prod/ﬁles/SG%202010%20Peer%20Review%20-%20Distributed%
20Energy%20Communications%20and%20Controls%20-%20Thomas%
20Rizy,%20ORNL.pdf
[28] Y. Li, G. Hao, Y. Liu, Y. Yu, Z. Ni, and Y. Zhao, “Many-objective
distribution network reconﬁguration via deep reinforcement learning
assisted optimization algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 37, no. 3,
pp. 2230–2244, Jun. 2022.
[29] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2018.
[30] N. Li, L. Chen, and S. H. Low, “Optimal demand response based on
utility maximization in power networks,” in Proc. IEEE Power Energy
Soc. Gen. Meeting, Jul. 2011, pp. 1–8.
[31] R. Mudumbai, S. Dasgupta, and B. B. Cho, “Distributed control for opti-
mal economic dispatch of a network of heterogeneous power generators,”
IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 1750–1760, Nov. 2012.
[32] S. Nagendra, N. Podila, R. Ugarakhod, and K. George, “Comparison of
reinforcement learning algorithms applied to the cart-pole problem,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Comput., Commun. Informat. (ICACCI), Sep. 2017,
pp. 26–32.
[33] V. Mnih et al., “Playing Atari with deep reinforcement learning,” 2013,
arXiv:1312.5602.
[34] S. Wang et al., “Adaptive federated learning in resource constrained
edge computing systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 37, no. 6,
pp. 1205–1221, Mar. 2019.
[35] T. Logenthiran, D. Srinivasan, A. M. Khambadkone, and H. N. Aung,
“Multiagent system for real-time operation of a microgrid in real-time
digital simulator,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 925–933,
Jun. 2012.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 06:46:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 13 ===
5914
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 5, MAY 2024
[36] G. Liu, Y. Xu, and K. Tomsovic, “Bidding strategy for microgrid in
day-ahead market based on hybrid stochastic/robust optimization,” IEEE
Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 227–237, Jan. 2016.
[37] G. Liu, M. Starke, B. Xiao, X. Zhang, and K. Tonsovic, “Microgrid
optimal scheduling with chance-constrained islanding capability,” Electr.
Power Syst. Res., vol. 145, pp. 197–206, Apr. 2017.
Yuanzheng Li (Member, IEEE) received the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
(HUST), Wuhan, China, and South China Univer-
sity of Technology (SCUT), Guangzhou, China, in
2011 and 2015, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor at HUST.
He has published several peer-reviewed papers in
international journals. His current research interests
include electric vehicle, deep learning, reinforce-
ment learning, smart grid, optimal power sys-
tem/MG scheduling and decision-making, stochastic optimization considering
large-scale integration of renewable energy into the power systems, and
multiobjective optimization.
Shangyang He received the B.S. degree in automa-
tion from the Wuhan University of Technology,
Wuhan, China, in 2020. He is currently pursuing
the M.S. degree with the Huazhong University of
Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan.
His research interests include electric vehicle
charging power forecast, deep learning, deep rein-
forcement learning, and graph neural networks.
Yang Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering from North China
Electric Power University, Beijing, China, in 2014.
He is an Associate Professor with the School
of Electrical Engineering, Northeast Electric Power
University,
Jilin,
China.
He
is
also
a
China
Scholarship Council-Funded Post-Doctoral with the
Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL, USA. His
research interests include power system stability and
control, integrated energy systems, renewable energy
integration, and smart grids.
Yang Shi (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
in electrical and computer engineering from the Uni-
versity of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, in 2005.
From 2005 to 2009, he was a Faculty Member
with the Department of Mechanical Engineering,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
He is currently a Professor with the Department
of Mechanical Engineering, University of Victoria,
Victoria, BC, Canada. His current research interests
include networked and distributed systems, model
predictive control, industrial cyber-physical systems,
mechatronics, and energy systems.
Dr. Shi is a fellow of the Canadian Society for Mechanical Engineering
(CSME) and the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) and a
Registered Professional Engineer at British Columbia, Canada. He received
the University of Saskatchewan Student Union Teaching Excellence Award
in 2007 and the Faculty of Engineering Teaching Excellence Award at the
University of Victoria in 2012. He received the JSPS Invitation Fellowship
(short term) in 2013 and the 2015 Craigdarroch Silver Medal for Excellence
in Research at the University of Victoria. Currently, he is a Coeditor-in-
Chief of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS; he also
serves as an Associate Editor for Automatica, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
CONTROL SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY, the IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON
MECHATRONICS, and the ASME Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement,
and Control.
Zhigang Zeng (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in systems analysis and integration from the
Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China, in 2003.
He is currently a Professor with the School
of Automation and the Key Laboratory of Image
Processing and Intelligent Control of the Educa-
tion Ministry of China, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology. He has published more
than 100 international journal articles. His current
research interests include theory of functional differ-
ential equations and differential equations with discontinuous right-hand sides
and their applications to dynamics of neural networks, memristive systems,
and control systems.
Dr. Zeng is a member of the Editorial Board of Neural Networks, since
2012, Cognitive Computation, since 2010, and Applied Soft Computing, since
2013. He was an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL
NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, from 2010 to 2011. He has been
an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, since
2014 and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, since 2016.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Donghua University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 06:46:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
